COLORFUL COSMETICS AND JEWELRY  

One of the most frequent and mistaken complaints that people make against religion is that it is  too restrictive. In this permissive age when all the emphasis seems to be upon "doing your own  
thing," an unreasonable attitude of self-will has developed. This attitude has even intruded into  religion. Church members and non-members seem to be in quest of the same thing: a religion  which doesn't interfere with personal rights and freedom. Suspicion is aroused instantly against  any doctrine which demands the "giving up" of anything. As this liberal spirit has grown stronger, many church members have turned more and more  critical of the high spiritual standards upheld by the church. Obviously embarrassed by the  widening gap between the church and the world, and unwilling to meet the social stigma of  being a "peculiar" minority, these members have sought to justify their compromise in the area  of Christian standards. They often argue that the church is being narrow and legalistic and that  many fine people are being discouraged from joining the church by this "arbitrary imposition of  rules."  If these complaints are valid, then some basic changes surely need to be made in the doctrine  of the church. If they are not valid, then we desperately need to know how to present the  standards of Christian conduct in their true biblical setting. In other words, we must definitely  establish whether these rules were made by God or by the church. We must also find out if they  are arbitrary prohibitions or God's loving regulations for our own happiness.  In contrast to the popular revolt against any absolute law of individual conduct, we must  consider the Bible facts about the Christian life in general and morals in particular. How  compatible are these modem demands for personal freedom with the standards of God's  Word? Let us suppose that the true biblical position could be presented with all the love and  persuasion of an angel from Heaven. Would the troth be easy for anyone to accept?  Let's face it. The path to eternal life is not a soft, flowery way of ease. Jesus laid such emphasis  upon this in so many texts that we cannot be blind to it. He said, "Strait is the gate, and narrow  is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it." Matthew 7:14. One of the  very first principles of being a Christian is self-denial. Christ said, "If any man will come after me,  let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me." Luke 9:23. To be a Christian  involves complete surrender. Our Lord's parable of the pearl and the merchantman reveals that  we must be willing to invest every single thing we have in obtaining that tremendous prize of  eternal life. If we allow one thing or one person to come between us and doing the will of  Christ, we cannot be saved.  Have we been guilty of discounting the price of discipleship so that people will not feel that the  path is too narrow and restrictive? Jesus said, "Whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not all  that he hath, he cannot be my disciple." Luke 14:33. The rich young ruler was told by Jesus that  he lacked only one thing in his preparation for Heaven, but that one thing he was not willing to  do. He would have to surrender his wealth in order to be saved, but he was not willing to give it  away. He loved something more than he loved the Lord, and he went away sorrowful and lost.  The position of Christ was so strong on this point that He even said, "He that loveth father or  mother more than me is not worthy of me: and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is  not worthy of me." Matthew 10:37.  Now, I believe that we should search for the kindest, most tactful and loving way to present the  claims of Christ to men and women. But I also believe that it will make little difference how it is  presented, if individuals have no love for the Lord Jesus. The fault does not lie with the  message; some of the fault lies with the preachers in the way they present it, but much of the fault lies in the attitude of the complaining Christian who feels rebellious against the truth  
because it requires a degree of self-denial.  Let me illustrate how personal feelings and attitude can make all the difference in the world.  Marriage is the most restrictive experience that any human being can voluntarily assume in this  world, aside from his spiritual commitment to Christ. The man promises to surrender many of  his former attachments and practices. He yields up his freedom to date other girls, and  solemnly binds himself to that one-and-only for the rest of his life. The bride also makes similar  restrictive pledges, and agrees to forsake all others in her devotion to the man at her side. The  wedding vows are undoubtedly among the most narrow, rigid commitments any human being  can make in his lifetime. If restrictions and rules are the cause of so much misery, then  weddings should be the most miserable, unhappy experiences for all concerned. But not so!  They are the happiest events. Why? Why is the bride so radiant as she stands up to pledge her  very life away to the groom? How can the man be so happy to make the promises which will  inhibit his activities for the rest of his life? The answer is simple. They love each other. It is their  attitude and feeling toward each other that makes the restrictions a joy to accept.  Have you ever heard a bride complaining after the ceremony? Probably no one has ever heard  her say bitterly, "Now I can't date Jim and Andy anymore. It's not fair. The State is forcing me to  be faithful to my husband. This marriage business is too restrictive." No, you've not heard that.  Neither have you heard a new bridegroom complaining that he is now compelled to give part of  his salary to support his wife. True, the law demands that he do it under penalty of  imprisonment, but he is not even conscious of the law. State law is ready to convict the bride if  she commits adultery, but she doesn't even think of such a law. They are in love, and love  changes everything. They are not being faithful because of fear of punishment. They are being  faithful because they want to please the person whom they love so deeply.  The most miserable men and women in this world are the ones who are married and no longer  love each other. Here is almost literally hell on earth. They chafe and complain about the  restrictions and impositions upon them. Similarly, the unhappiest church members in ail the  world are those who are married to Christ through baptism, and yet do not love Him. They are  often bitterly blaming the church and their instructors for imposing upon them their narrow,  restrictive religion.  But is it the religion or the pastors who are at fault? The sad fact is that those people have  never entered the personal love-relationship which is the cornerstone of all true religion. Many  of them have learned the right texts for the Bible study course and are quite able to explain the  order of last-day events, but they have had no personal encounter with Jesus Christ.  Somewhere, and perhaps everywhere, along the lines of the indoctrination they were not  taught, or did not choose to accept, the true basis of heart religion. It is not a set of rules or a  list of doctrines, but a deeply personal involvement in a love affair with the man Jesus Christ.  The difficulty with millions of Christians is their motive for being church members. They have a  fire-escape religion. They do certain things only because they are afraid of the fu, e at the end of the road. They serve the Lord fearfully because they tremble at the thought of being cast into  the lake of fire. No wonder they are long-faced and miserable! What a perversion of the truth!  Christians should be the happiest people in the world--happier even than the newlyweds as  they leave the wedding chapel! The Christian should love the Lord even more than husband or  wife.  Do you think a home Could be happy if the wife prepared her husband's favorite dish each day  
because she feared he might divorce her? Earthly relationships would collapse under this strain.  She prepares that dish because she loves her husband and wants to please him. When his wife's  birthday approaches, a loving, Christian husband often watches and listens for an indication of  what his wife would like to have. And usually she doesn't have to hit him over the head to let  him know! He gladly buys her the gift because he loves her and wants to please her. In the  same way the Christian will be searching the Bible daily to discover ways of pleasing the Lord.  He will constantly be looking for signs and indications of how to please the One he loves  supremely. In the Twentieth Century translation of the Bible we read these words, "Always be  trying to find out what best pleases the Lord." Ephesians 5:10. What a motto for every  Christian! Indeed this is the supreme desire of those who love the Lord sincerely. No wonder  Christ summarized the first table of the law in these words: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God  with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great  commandment." Matthew 22:37, 38.  The real reason some Christians chafe and complain about the rules and the strictness is  because they have only enough religion to make them miserable. The scope of their Christian  "experience" is based upon a constant struggle to live up to the rules---an effort to keep the  law. Now certainly there is nothing wrong with obeying the commandments of God any more  than there is with a husband obeying the state law to support his wife. But if the demands of  the law are the only reason for obeying it, then something is seriously wrong with the Christian  and with the husband. Love lifts the legal load and makes delightful what could be a burden and  strain.  A mother of three boys was having a terrible struggle trying to enforce the laws of good  grooming and cleanliness. Like most little boys these three resisted the rules about washing  ears, combing hair, and shining shoes. It was a daily battle which Mother won only through the  long arm of authority and force. But one day the oldest boy, in his early teens, walked out of his  room looking the model of impeccable neatness. Every hair seemed to be in exactly the right  place, and the shoes below the well-turned cuff were shining to perfection. The mother almost  fainted. Hardly able to suppress her surprise and delight, she wisely decided to wait and watch  for the answer to this turn of events. The solution to the puzzle was not long in coming. The  very next day Mother learned that a new family had moved in down the block, and there was a  girl in the family. Perhaps the girl had not seen Johnny, but he had already seen her and it had  profoundly affected him. We'll not say that it was love which changed his attitude toward the  laws of good grooming, but he definitely wasn't cleaning up from fear of mother's enforcement  any longer. The point is that the Christian life is not composed of just "do's' and "don'ts." There are  restrictions, to be sure, in this spiritual marriage, just as there are in physical marriage. But  those restrictions are imposed by love which seeks always and ever to please the object of the  affections. Those Christians who are in love with Christ are exuberant, beaming witnesses that  this is the way of tree happiness. Unfortunately, there is a larger group of church members who  are miserably enduring what should be blissfully enjoyed. They are bitter and complaining  about not being able to eat what they please or dress as they wish to. They blame the church  for their being forced to "give up" so many things. Their religion seems much like the man with  a headache. He didn't want to cut off his head but it hurt him to keep it. Their joyless attitude  seems to assume that their religion is the product of some committee of gloomy preachers  
bent on including all the prohibitive rules that could make men, women, and young people  unhappy.  But is this true? What about the spiritual principles which make up the doctrine which we call  Christian standards? Is it an arbitrary church law that one should not attend the theatre? Is it  God's decision or man's decision that dancing is improper for a Christian? And what about the  use of colorful cosmetics and jewelry--is it pleasing to God or displeasing? The truth is that  every point of our faith and doctrine should be based soundly upon the principle of doing God's  will as revealed in the Bible. Love for Him will always provoke the question, How can I always be  trying to find out what best pleases the Lord?  The answer to that question is found in scores of Bible texts which give indications and clear  signals on how to please Him rather than ourselves. This is the only really relevant question  concerning any activity or practice. What does God think about it? It doesn't matter what this  preacher or that preacher thinks of it, or what this church or that church believes about it. The  great, all-important question is this: Is it pleasing or displeasing to the Lord? If we find texts  which reveal that God doesn't approve, there should be no further debate with the genuine  Christian. We love Him too much to risk displeasing Him. Our delight should be to find and  execute those things that please the One we love, and to eliminate from our lives those things  that displease Him.  When people are in love they do not need to threaten each other or lay down ultimatums. They  constantly search for ways to show their love and to please one another. Those who fulfil the  first and great command of Christ will not feel it a burden to obey. God is searching for those  who will be sensitive to the slightest indication of His will. He is not pleased by those who must  be constantly prodded into line by fear of punishment. God says: "I will instruct thee and teach  thee in the way which thou shalt go: I will guide thee with mine eye. Be ye not as the horse, or  as the mule, which have no understanding; whose mouth must be held in with bit and bridle,  lest they come near unto thee." Psalm 32:8, 9.  Many Christians are "bit-and-bridle" followers. They respond only to threats, and obey because  of fear of punishment. God says, "I want you to be corrected by a look from me." Only those  who love Him supremely and are watching for indications of His pleasure will recognize the  loving glance of correction. Searching the Bible with one purpose--to discover what pleases Him---they will immediately obey the slightest revelation of His will. This is the essence of true  Christianity--ordering every level of life in harmony with His revealed will, because of love.  With this little background on how to make love the motivating factor in setting up Christian  standards, we are now prepared to illustrate how the principle operates in practice. Although  any one of the "conduct" standards of the church could be used, let us choose one which has  evoked considerable complaint-colorful cosmetics and jewelry. Multitudes of sincere members  have laid aside the use of these artificial adornments "because the church says so." This is a  poor reason for doing anything in the Christian life. It is hoped that the reading of this chapter  will cause explanations about arbitrary church rules on the subject to give way to personal  conviction based on loving and pleasing the Lord.  Repeatedly, pastors have faced the questions: "What is wrong with my little wedding ring? Do  you think God will leave me out of Heaven just because I wear this bit of jewelry?" My own  heart has been dismayed and troubled on many occasions over this negative approach to  Christianity. Please note what the question implies. The questioner is obviously seeking to know  
how much he can get by with, and still make it to Heaven. His attitude reflects a legalistic desire  to do only the things which are laid down as divine "do-it-or-else" laws.  But this approach is wrong, wrong, wrong! The true Christian will not ask, "How much do I have  to do in order to remain a child of God?" but rather, "How much can I do to please Jesus whom  I love?" This is the positive approach based on seeking God's will on the questions and loving  Him enough to obey His will happily as revealed in the Bible. Once this open-hearted, loving  premise is accepted it remains only to search through the Scripture to find indications of God's  will concerning the use of colorful cosmetics and ornaments. This we shall now proceed to do.  In Genesis 35:1-4, Jacob was told by God to take his family to Bethel where they were to be  presented at the altar of the Lord. This was a very sacred spot to Jacob---the place of his  conversion in earlier days, after seeing the heavenly ladder in his dream. But before they could  be consecrated at that holy spot, Jacob told his household to "put away the strange gods that  are among you." Verse 2. Apparently the family had picked up some of the heathen customs in  their tarrying in the land. There were certain objects which had to be laid aside before they  went up to the altar, because they were pagan objects. Please notice, in verse 4, what these  objects were: "And they gave unto Jacob all the strange gods which were in their hand, and all  the earrings which were in their ears: and Jacob hid them under the oak which was by  Shechem." In Judges 8:24 we are assured that earrings were worn by those who were  Ishmaelites. The context strongly implies that they wore the ornaments as a mark of their  apostasy from the true God. The thirty-fourth chapter of Genesis reveals that Jacob's sons had  committed some grievous sins, and Jacob was coming before God to make a solemn atonement  for them and for his family. It was a time of heart-searching and repentance. Everything was  done to make wrongs fight and to open the way for God's blessing to come upon them. The  custom of wearing heathen ornaments was given up, along with the strange gods. The earrings  were laid aside. Under similar circumstances a reformation took place in Exodus 33:1-6. A terrible apostasy had  developed in the previous chapter while Moses was in the mountain receiving the Ten  Commandments. A large number of the Israelites had worshipped the golden calf, bringing  plague and destruction which threatened the nation. Moses called for them to repent in these  words: "Consecrate yourselves today to the Lord, even every man upon his son, and upon his  brother; that he may bestow upon you a blessing this day." Exodus 32:29.  In the next chapter, Moses went up to the tabernacle to plead with God for the people, who  were still adorned with their heathen trappings from the day of indulgence and sin. The  instruction God gave for the restoration of Israel included a change of dress, just as it had  earlier in the case of Jacob and his family. God said, "Say unto the children of Israel, Ye are a  stiff-necked people; I will come up into the midst of thee in a moment, and consume thee:  therefore now put off thy ornaments from thee, that I may know what to do unto thee. And the  children of Israel stripped themselves of their ornaments by the mount Horeb." Exodus 33:5, 6.  We are left in no doubt as to the attitude of God concerning the wearing of those ornaments.  God, who changes not, told them to take off those things and present themselves for judgment,  to answer for their apostasy. It is of more than passing interest to note that this prohibition was  laid down in connection with their going into the promised land. God said, "I will send an angel  before thee; and I will drive out the Canaanite, the Amorite ... for I will not go up in the midst of  thee; for thou art a stiff-necked people." Exodus 33:2, 3. It is significant that they were required  
to strip off the ornaments before they could enter the promised land. Does this have anything  to do with us? Indeed it does. Paul assures us in 1 Corinthians 10:11 that "all these things  happened unto them for ensamples: and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the  ends of the world are come." He likens their Red Sea experience to baptism in verse 2, and in  verses 7 and 8 he refers to the great apostasy experience of Israel in Exodus 32, when they  made their golden calf. Then immediately he explains in verse 11 that these things which  happened to them were for "our admonition." This can only mean that God's dealing with them  over their apostasy is to teach us something. His command for them to remove the ornaments  before going into the land of Canaan applies to us before going into the heavenly Canaan. The  parallel is obvious in the context.  The earliest record in existence concerning the use of colorful cosmetics is found in 2 Kings  9:30. Many have questioned the origin of the expression "painted up like Jezebel." The answer  is found in this text. "And when Jehu was come to Jezreel, Jezebel heard of it; and she painted  her face, and tired her head, and looked out at a window." The history of that infamous  heathen queen, who put hundreds of God's prophets to death, is well known to Bible students.  To trace the biblical origin of the custom to Jezebel certainly casts an unholy shadow over the  practice. But we shall see in a moment that the use of colorful cosmetics was a consistent mark  of heathen women and unfaithful women throughout the Bible record.  Through the prophet Isaiah God sent one of the most scathing denunciations of jewelry that  can be found anywhere in the Bible. Nowhere do we find a more direct and unequivocal  revelation of God's feelings toward the wearing of ornaments. In Isaiah 3:16 God does not generalize about ornaments, but gives a long list of specific articles which were being worn by  the "daughters of Zion.' Now, let's notice whether God, the same yesterday, today, and forever,  was pleased with the wearing of these things. "Moreover the Lord saith, Because the daughters  of Zion are haughty, and walk with stretched forth necks and wanton eyes, walking and mincing  as they go, and making a tinkling with their feet ... In that day the Lord will take away the  bravery of their tinkling ornaments about their feet, and their cauls .... The chains, and the  bracelets, and the mufflers .... the ornaments of the legs, and the headbands, and the tablets,  and the earrings, The rings, and nose jewels." Isaiah 3:16-21.  Let's pause in the midst of this recital and ask the question, How will God take away these  things? In the next chapter, verse 4, we read, "When the Lord shall have washed away the filth  of the daughters of Zion ... by the spirit of burning." Don't overlook the fact that God refers to  all these objects of adornment as "filth." He further describes most graphically the ones who  survive the "washing away" of the ornaments: "In that day shah the branch of the Lord be  beautiful and glorious, and the fruit of the earth shall be excellent and comely for them that are  escaped of Israel. And it shall come to pass, that he that is left in Zion, and he that remaineth in  Jerusalem, shall be called holy, even every one that is written among the living in Jerusalem."  Isaiah 4:2, 3.  In bold, clear strokes the prophet reveals the abhor-fence of God for the manifestations of  pride in wearing ornaments. After the washing away of those artificial baubles, God describes  the women as being "comely," "holy," and "beautiful." Apparently He does not appraise beauty  in the same way that we do. The women put on all their jewelry to make themselves beautiful,  but God said it was filthy. When it was all washed away, He said they were comely and  beautiful. Do not miss the extreme significance of this troth. God uses that word "comely" to  
describe His bride, the church. "I have likened the daughter of Zion to a comely and delicate  woman." Jeremiah 6:2. As if to reinforce His assessment of the type of pride under  consideration, God made the following observation: "The shew of their countenance doth  witness against them; and they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not. Woe unto their soul  for they have rewarded evil unto themselves." Isaiah 3:9. No question is permitted to remain  about the impropriety of outward adornment. Their decorated faces were involved in the  vanity to such a degree that God used the women's makeup as an example of brazen  shamelessness.  It will be well to take note at this point that God identified rings as part of the "filth of the  daughters of Zion." What kind of rings was he talking about? High school seniors will answer  immediately, "My class ring is symbolic of my being a senior. It's not worn as an ornament. God  was talking about other kinds of rings." The Mason will defend his Masonic ring in almost the  same words: "God wasn't talking about my ring. It simply represents my belonging to the  Lodge." And then there are the birthstone rings, the engagement tings, and the wedding rings-- -they also have symbolic meanings. How easy to justify the one we happen to be wearing and  to claim that God was not talking about that one. But how do we know God wasn't talking  about the very one we are wearing? Would it not be presumptuous to feel that God makes an  exception for the one we are wearing, just because we don't want to give it up? After all, why are we searching the Bible on this subject? Are we not trying to find out what  best pleases the Lord? We are not seeking for ways to get around what pleases Him. Our sole  purpose is to find His will in order to do it. We love Him too much to risk displeasing Him. This is  why the true Christian will not quibble over the kind offing, or seek a rationalization in going  contrary to God's will. Lay aside all tings. Isn't it patently obvious that if one symbolic ring can  be defended, then all symbolic rings can be defended? In no instance do we find any biblical- precedent for wearing a physical sign of marriage. The history of the wedding ting is tainted  with pagan sun-worship and papal superstition. Not one argument put forward in its favor  carries any weight in comparison to the one great fact that it is not pleasing to the Lord! A  carnal Christian could argue that it is not clear that one will be lost for wearing a ring. But the  Christian who loves God supremely will answer that it is enough to know that it displeases our  Lover and Friend.  Incidentally, there is plenty of historic evidence of the pagan origin of the wearing of a wedding  ting. John Henry Newman, after he forsook Anglicanism to become, later, a cardinal of the  Roman Catholic church, wrote these words: "Constantine, in order to recommend the new  religion to the heathen, transferred into it the outward adornments to which they had been  accustomed in their own. It is not necessary to go into a subject which the diligence of  Protestant writers has made familiar to most of us. The use of temples, and these dedicated to  particular saints ... incense ... candies ... holy water ... processions ... the ring in marriage,  turning to the east, images at a later date.., are all of pagan origin, and sanctified by their  adoption into the Church." An Essay On the Development of Christian Doctrine, p. 373.  (Emphasis supplied.)  The prophet Jeremiah, like so many other Old Testament writers, added more counsel  concerning the type of people who wore artificial ornaments. God moved upon those holy men  to represent the church prophetically as a woman. When God's people were backslidden, they  were portrayed by the prophet as a harlot or an unfaithful wife. Thus we read texts like the  
following: "And when thou art spoiled, what wilt thou do? Though thou clothest thyself with  crimson, though thou deckest thee with ornaments of gold, though thou rentest thy face with  painting, in vain shalt thou make thyself fair, thy lovers will despise thee, they will seek thy life."  Jeremiah 4:30.  Through Ezekiel, God symbolized His apostatized people, Judah and Israel, by two harlots  named Aholah and Aholibah. His description of their bold ornamentation matched the  lewdness of their conduct. "And furthermore, that ye have sent for men to come from far, unto  whom a messenger was sent; and, 1o, they came: for whom thou didst wash thyself, paintedst  thy eyes, and deckedst thyself with ornaments." Ezekiel 23:40.  Hosea expresses the same thought when he describes the hypocrisy of Israel. Again, the  unfaithfulness was well-dramatized by a decorated woman. "And I will visit upon her the days  of Baalim, wherein she burned incense to them, and she decked herself with her earrings and  her jewels, and she went after her lovers, and forgat me, saith the Lord." Hosea 2:13. Over and over again, the Bible connects the wearing of colorful cosmetics and jewelry with sin,  apostasy, and heathenism. When they turned away from the Lord they put on the ornaments  which, as Isaiah said, "declare their sin." There is no lack of texts which spell out the truth  clearly and without equivocation--the great God of Heaven was displeased with those things  and used them to symbolize departure from His will.  Turning to the New Testament, the picture comes into even sharper focus. John, in the book of  Revelation, describes the scarlet woman of sin (symbolizing the false church) as "decked with  gold and precious stones and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand full of abominations and  filthiness of her fornication." Revelation 17:4.  In contrast the true church is depicted in Revelation 12:1 as a beautiful woman clothed with the  glory of the sun. This woman is called the bride of Christ in Revelation 21:9. Notice that no  ornaments are worn by the bride of Christ. These types of the true and the false religious  systems also point up the estimate God places upon the use of artificial adornment.  Two final texts from the writings of Peter and Paul will reveal the firm, consistent views of the  early church concerning this practice. Both of these stalwarts occupied positions of influence  among the disciples, and their Spirit-filled letters represent the unchallenged view of the  apostolic church. Paul wrote, "In like manner also, that women adorn themselves in modest  apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety; not with braided hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly  array; But (which becometh women professing godliness) with good works." 1 Timothy 2:9, 10.  Peter wrote in much the same manner, except that he especially addressed Christian women  who had unbelieving husbands. "Likewise, ye wives, be in subjection to your own husbands;  that, if any obey not the word, they also may without the word be won by the conversation of  the wives; While they behold your chaste conversation coupled with fear. Whose adorning let it  not be that outward adorning of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of gold or of putting on of  apparel; But let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the  ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price." 1 Peter 3:1-4.  These words of Peter contain counsel for every Christian wife in the church today, and they  deal with one of the most perplexing problems that faces Christian women whose husbands are  not with them in the faith. How far should the believing wife go in trying to please her  unregenerate husband? To what degree should she compromise the truth of God in little things  to keep things smooth at home and possibly to help win her husband? Peter's advice is simple  
and clear-cut. Don't compromise truth and principle at all. Even if the wife is not permitted to  speak about her faith she can win her husband by her "chaste conversation.'' Other translations  use the more proper term "conduct" instead of "conversation."  But notice how the conduct of the Christian wife will manifest itself. Peter asserts that she will  win her husband much more readily by laying aside the outward adornment. Surely the Spirit of  God anticipated the dilemma of the wife who feels that she needs to wear a wedding ting to  please her husband, even though she knows it does not please the Lord. This text makes it exceedingly clear that God should come first, and that such a decision also will do more to win  the husband than any other course. Hundreds of evangelists and pastors could bear witness  that this is true. The women who eventually lead their husbands into the faith are the ones who  hold firmly to the standard of God's Word. The ones who do not win their companions are  those who will let down the standard in little things to be more compatible with their  unbelieving husbands.  This may seem contradictory, but the practical results are demonstrable. As long as the wife is  not living up to all the points of her own belief, the husband figures that it must not be very  important. He cannot get excited about doing something which does not even claim the full  compliance of his sweet, Christian wife. But if she does take a firm stand to please the Lord  above all others, even in the face of his own displeasure, the husband is deeply impressed that  this "religion bit" must be important. He probably will say nothing about his true feelings. He  may, in fact, affect great indignation, but his respect and admiration will be secretly stirred by  the firm, conscientious stand of his wife.  We must anticipate right here the argument that is advanced by the wives who are not inclined  to part with their wedding rings. They say, "I don't want to give up my ring because it shows  that I am married. I'm proud of my husband. I want everyone to know that I'm married. I think  marriage is a most sacred and important thing." No one can find fault with these sincere  sentiments. Every wife should love her husband, and be proud of him. Marriage is important,  and she should want everyone to know that she is married. But let's ask this question: Is there  anything in a person's life which is more important than marriage? Yes, there is just one thing  which is more important than being married to a husband or wife, and that is to be married to  Christ. The claims of Christ's love are the only claims which should ever take priority over the  love of husband and wife. In the light of all the overwhelming Bible evidence, we have  discovered that ornaments are displeasing to the Lord, our Lover. It is true that the wedding  ring will tell everyone that the wife is married to her husband, but it will also tell something  else. It will tell that she has chosen to please her husband rather than the Lord Jesus. It will  reveal that she is placing someone else's will above the Bible-revealed will of God. As such, it  bears a wrong testimony to the world.  Some may object that such a conclusion is too strong. Some are bound to say, "You are judging  and testing my Christianity by a little thing like a ring or an ornament." No, this is not the case.  It is love for God which is being tested, and the Bible clearly points out the criteria for the test.  That test not only involves keeping the plainly revealed commandments of God, but also  includes laying aside everything else that we discover does not please Him. Here is the  evidence: "And whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his commandments,  and do those things that are pleasing in his sight." 1 John 3:22.  Please do not overlook the two things which true Christians will always be doing. They obey the  
direct, overt requirements that God lays down in His law, but they also go further by searching  out everything that would please Him. In other words, they will obey the injunction to "always  be trying to find out what best pleases the Lord." Ephesians 5:10 (20th Century Translation). Jesus exemplified and dramatized this divine principle in His own life and teachings. He said,  "The Father hath not left me alone; for I do always those things that please him." John 8:29.  The arbitrary commandments are obvious even to a carnal man, but the little things that please  God are revealed only to the loving heart of the Christian who searches the Word for  indications of His will. It is a solemn fact that those who will be saved at the coming of Jesus are  symbolized by Enoch, who "was translated that he should not see death ... for before his  translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God." Hebrews 11:5. Paul describes the  glorious coming of Christ in 1 Thessalonians 4:16. In the same text he portrays the resurrection  of the righteous dead, and the catching up of the righteous living. But, speaking of those saints  who should be ready for translation, Paul said, I "exhort you by the Lord Jesus ... how ye ought  to walk and to please God." 1 Thessalonians 4:1. One of the marks of those who are redeemed  out of the earth is their willingness to please the Lord in everything.  Listen, if you know a certain thing is pleasing to the Lord, and yet you refuse to do it, what are  you really doing? You are pleasing someone else above the Lord. You may say, "But it's such a  small, small thing." Of course it is a small thing, but love is actually tested and proved by the  little things we do for one another. Ask any housewife if it isn't so. Her husband may give her a  washing machine on her birthday and she would appreciate it. But if he brings home flowers in  the middle of the week and says, "Honey, let me dry the dishes for you," any wife will tell you  that it means more than the washing machine. Why? Because it reveals more of his true feeling  to do the little things than to do big things that are more or less expected. God is pleased when  we keep His Ten Commandments, but we really show our love more by going beyond the  commandments, to please Him in the little things which are revealed in the Bible.  Right and wrong never have been, and never should be, measured by the amount. It is the  quality of sin, not the quantity, which presents the larger problem to the Christian. The Bible  reveals the fact that colorful cosmetics, rings, etc. are displeasing to the Lord. The Word of God  does not reveal that a certain quantity of colorful cosmetics is wrong, or that a certain type or  number of rings is displeasing to Him. Even the smallest deliberate violation of the revealed will  of God is serious. It indicates an inward rebellion against placing God first. The devil's favorite  argument today is, "A little bit is all fight." This was Lot's foolish argument when he was ordered  by the angels to flee into the mountains. He begged for permission to go into another city close  by Sodom and Gomorrah. His argument was, "Is it not a little one?" Genesis 19:20. Can you  understand why he wanted to go into another city after losing everything he had in Sodom? Yet  the same rationalization is used by many Christians today. They debate and quibble over the  size of their rings, or the amount of the immodesty.  Satan is delighted to hear people trying to decide just how much they should violate the will of  God. Never forget this: it is not the degree of the deviation from the Bible standard which is so  important, but it is the fact that there is a deviation which constitutes the real problem. The  size of the step is not the thing of greatest importance but rather the direction in which the  step leads. Sometimes ministers are accused of making a big issue out of the wedding ring, because they  wait for the candidate to remove it before being baptized. Actually, experience has proved that  
the ring is not the problem at all. The ring is merely the symptom of a much more serious  problem---the lack of full surrender. When the heart is yielded, and God is made first in the life,  no convert will allow a little ring to stand in the way of uniting with the body of Christ by  baptism. When love of Christ is stronger than love of self or husband or wife, then nothing will  stand in the way, least of all a small metal ring.  Now we shall give consideration to another aspect of biblical evidence on this subject which  some consider to be the most persuasive of all. It answers the objection raised by the few who  are still unconvinced that jewelry is displeasing to God. In the most explicit manner it  demolishes the last stronghold of defense for even the wedding ring.  Before moving into Paul's eloquent discourse on this point, let us establish a fact which is well  known to all who are engaged in full-time soul winning. Those who persist in wearing their  ornaments, after becoming members of the church, have been responsible for placing a  stumbling block in the path of interested souls. Almost any evangelist or pastor could break  your heart with stories of men and women who were turned back almost at the baptistry by  the inconsistency of a few church members. After being taught the full Bible troth about  Christian standards, these candidates are shocked to see church members, and sometimes  church officers, wearing rings or other adornment. Many drop back in disappointment and  refuse to join the church.  Someone is bound to object, "Well, they should not be looking at people so much. They ought  to accept the truth because it is the troth.' This is very good and true, but just remember that  we are dealing with souls who are searching for loopholes around the unpopular message of  the Bible. It is our business to close every loophole patiently and meet every argument so that  they finally surrender in full obedience. The fact is that these people have a right to expect the  church to be practicing what it preaches. A few inconsistent members can counteract months  of prayerful study and preparation of candidates on the part of the pastor. It isn't right that  anyone should be a stumbling block to another individual.  Paul penned the most solemn warning to those who would discourage a single soul in Christian  growth. "Let us not therefore judge one another any more: but judge this rather, that no man  put a stumbling block or an occasion to fall in his brother's way." Romans 14:13. Jesus spoke  out on the very same topic except that He described the enormity of causing a child to stumble.  Perhaps His words will have more meaning for us if we read them with children's Sabbath  School teachers in mind. "Whoso shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it  were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in  the depth of the sea." Matthew 18:6. Serious words indeed! But no more serious than the  offence it describes--the misleading of little children who look to teachers as examples. How  often have little girls questioned the Bible standards about rings after seeing a ring on the  finger of a favorite teacher. In one particular church, a kindergarten teacher who wore a wedding ring was idolized by a  little girl in her department. During the church service the child would often be permitted to sit  with the teacher and her husband.  Since they had no children of their own, the couple was delighted to have the well-behaved  little girl sit with them. She would usually occupy herself with things in the teacher's purse, but,  being of an affectionate nature, she would cling to the hand of her teacher much of the time.  One Sabbath during the sermon, the woman glanced down at the little girl and noticed she had  
slipped off the wedding ring and placed it around her small finger. Somewhat perturbed, she  recovered the ring and put it back on her own finger.  Week by week, much to her chagrin, she noticed how obsessed the tot seemed to be with the  ring. She fondled and caressed the ring, and often tried to remove it unobtrusively, so that she  could slip it around her childish fingers. The growing fascination of the little girl for the golden  circle became an increasing concern to the older woman. Knowing the Bible teachings about  ornaments, her conscience had not been at ease from the time she had started wearing the  ring. Now she was unable to enjoy the worship service, as she sought to divert the girl's vain  attention from the article of adornment.  At last she could bear it no longer. Under deep conviction that she was placing a stumbling  block in the path of the child, she removed the offending ring once and for all. Later, she  related the experience to her pastor, and described the feelings of guilt which tormented her  for placing temptation before the face of an innocent little girl.  "But I don't see anything wrong with rings. Why should I be a hypocrite and take them off just  to impress someone?" This is a question which Paul answers with devastating effect in 1  Corinthians 8:1-13. That entire chapter is concerned with the problem of foods offered to idols.  The early church was seriously divided over the issue. The Gentile Christians who had come in  from paganism believed that it was wrong to eat such meat. They remembered offering the  food in sacrifice to idols. Even though they were now Christians, they still felt it was somehow  giving allegiance to the idol to eat the food. On the other hand, the Jewish Christians who had  come into the church from Judaism, felt that the food was perfectly good to eat. Since the meat  was not "unclean" and since it was sold along with other meats in the marketplace, the Jewish  Christians bought it with no question of conscience whatever.  The contention became so severe between the two groups that Paul finally had to deal with it  at considerable length in 1 Corinthians 8. Notice his decision in the matter: "As concerning  therefore the eating of those things that are offered in sacrifice unto idols, we know that an idol  is nothing in the world, and that there is none other God but one ... Howbeit there is not in  every man that knowledge: for some with conscience of the idol unto this hour eat it as a thing  offered unto an idol; and their conscience being weak is defiled ... But take heed lest by any  means this liberty of yours become a stumbling block to them that are weak. For if any man see  thee which hast knowledge sit at meat in the idol's temple, shall not the conscience of him  which is weak be emboldened to eat those things which are offered to idols; And through thy knowledge shall the weak brother perish, for whom Christ died? But when ye sin so against the  brethren, and wound their weak conscience, ye sin against Christ." Verses 4-12.  These tremendous verses, with their spiritual focus on love for others, apply with even greater  force to those who feel at liberty to wear rings in the church. The application is stronger  because the ornaments are condemned by God, whereas the meats offered to idols were not  condemned. Still, Paul said it was a sin to eat such food because it was a stumbling block, or  hindrance, to someone else. Since the rings have been stumbling blocks in the same way, to  other fellow Christians, we cannot escape the conclusion that such an offence is also a "sin  against Christ."  This brings us right back to the central theme of this little book--love. Whether we are looking  at Christian standards from the viewpoint of loving and pleasing God, or loving our neighbor,  the result is just the same. The whole idea is to put self last of all. A religion based upon such  
love will not be satisfied merely to fulfill the letter of the Ten Commandments but will search  the Word of God daily for indications of His will. As John reminds us, "We keep his  commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight." 1 John 3:22.  May I ask a question concerning what you have read up to this point? Has it raised a doubt  about the wearing of ornaments? Does the evidence of all these verses, scattered through the  Bible, suggest that the practice is open to question? One couple said, "We are not convinced  yet that God would keep us out of Heaven for wearing a piece of jewelry." I asked them, "Even  though you don't feel you would be lost by wearing it, do the many texts raise at least some  question about the practice meeting the full approval of God? .... Oh, yes," they said, "we  cannot say that the issue is not a bit cloudy." My next question was this: "Do you think there is  a 10 percent chance that wearing your ring could be displeasing to God?" After thinking a  moment, they both agreed that there was at least that much chance that it was questionable.  Then I asked them this question: "As you stand on the brink of baptism and the complete  surrender of your lives to the Lord Jesus Christ, do you want to run a 10 percent chance of  displeasing the Lord who has laid down His life for you?"  Slowly they reached down and began to remove their rings. "No," the husband said, "we don't  want to run the smallest chance of displeasing Him. We want to go all the way with Jesus. Since  there is a doubt, we'll give Him the benefit of the doubt."  I will not try to pretend that this kind of surrender is easy. Jesus said, "If any man will come  after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily and follow me." Luke 9:23. Saying  "No" to self is what the Master was talking about. He was saying that everyone will have to  baffle it out with something that self doesn't want to surrender. The individual who is coming to  Christ and learning His ways will have to deny self, or say "No" to something that his whole  nature craves to keep. That's what self denial means. Some people fail the test at one point,  and others at a different point. I've seen some who could not deny self on the point of money.  To obey God might jeopardize their jobs or cut their salaries, and they were not willing to say  no to their love of money. Others had to give up friends to go all the way in following Christ, and they were not willing to deny themselves their friends. Appetite has stood in the way of  many who were not willing to deny themselves the alcohol, tobacco, or unclean foods as  required in the Bible. A few have failed the test on the point of vanity and pride. They have  been unwilling to deny themselves the inordinate pride of dress.  It is always interesting to see how the truth weeds people out of an evangelistic audience. No  one drops out until we present the claims of God which demand a change of life and practice. If  we did not preach all the counsel of God, most listeners would gladly respond to the invitation.  Struggle takes place when the truth challenges a darling self-indulgence. The tests of the  Sabbath, tithe, and diet are all aimed at some element of the self nature. Many fail on each of  these points. But strangely enough, the greatest baffle seems to ensue when God's will touches  the area of personal pride. Vanity is deep and pervasive. Self-love has a thousand faces and  exhibits itself in as many subtle ways.  Mark it down, somewhere along the line for every soul the devil will use self to make a last  desperate stand against the will of God. Only those who love Christ with all their heart, soul,  and mind will be able or willing to make the 100 percent surrender to Him that is required. The  happiest people in the world are those who let nothing stand in their way of pleasing God in  everything.  
It has already been mentioned that Christians who live to please the Lord are the happiest  people in the world. Jesus said, "If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love; even  as I have kept my Father's commandments, and abide in his love. These things have I spoken  unto you, that my joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be full." John 15:10,11. No  wonder, then, that fully committed Christians are so easily recognized. There is a holy radiance  and joy shining from within which even transforms the countenance. Although they have laid  aside the adornment of the world, they have put on another adornment of the Spirit, which  identifies them instantly. Some women feel almost naked after removing their jewelry, but very  soon they recognize that God has replaced the artificial with the real. David wrote, "They  looked unto him, and were lightened: and their faces were not ashamed." Psalm 34:5.  It is this "new look" of the new-born Christian which has caused the world to marvel. For every  evil thing that is given up, the child of God receives a spiritual replacement. As Paul said, "Let us  therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light." Romans 13:12.  And please notice how dramatic this exchange can be when it involves the clothes and  adornment of an individual. The bride of Christ receives special attention.  Isaiah contrasts the marriage dress of God's people with the dress of the world. "I will greatly  rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God; for he hath clothed me with the garments  of salvation, he hath covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh  himself with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth herself with her jewels.' Isaiah 61:10. When  we are married to Christ and take His name, we are not to adorn ourselves as worldly brides  and bridegrooms. We are joyfully to be clothed with the "garments of salvation" and the "robe of righteousness." This is what lightens the face, and presents the new radiant appearance  which amazes the world.  This vital point should be given careful consideration. The face has much to say about a  person's character and experience. Our most powerful Christian witness may simply be the  witness of our shining countenance. One of the most convincing arguments I've ever heard  against the use of colorful cosmetics was based upon this very fact. Frances Parkinson Keyes,  the well-known Catholic author, explained why she had never "touched up" her face or hair  with artificial adornment: "A quarter century of living should put a great deal into a woman's  face besides a few wrinkles and some unwelcome folds around the chin. In that length of time  she has become intimately acquainted with pain and pleasure, joy and sorrow, life and death.  She has struggled and survived, failed, and succeeded. She has lost and regained faith. And as a  result she should be wiser, gentler, more patient and more tolerant than she was when she was  younger. Her sense of humor should have mellowed, her outlook should have widened, her  sympathies should have deepened. And all this should show. If she tries to erase the imprint of  age, she runs the risk of destroying, at the same time, the imprint of experience and character."  Words of lnspiration, p. 198.  What a tremendous truth is contained in that statement! Christian women have a witness to  bear by the expression of their faces. Righteousness, dignity, purity, and calm faith in God-- these attributes are often clearly revealed by the countenance alone. Perhaps this is what Jesus  meant when He said, "Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works,  and glorify your Father which is in heaven." Matthew 5:16. The spiritual light and radiance of an  unadorned face may attract more attention to the religion of Jesus Christ than a dozen sermons  or Bible studies.  
We have spent considerable time on the subject of artificial adornment in order to demonstrate  how love leads to the Bible, to search out what pleases the Lord. We could just as well have  used other examples of Christian standards. The same principles provide the motivation for  seeking always to please Him in what we do about dancing, movies, gambling, diet, and dress. It  could be shown just as clearly that these high standards of the church are not based upon any  committee actions of men, but upon the revealed will of God in His Word.  