OUR ENEMY--THE WORLD  

The world today is in an incredible state of flux and change. Traditional views and values have  been altered and almost reversed within a relatively short time. Under the numbing influence  of television and the highly mobile electronic media, minds have been manipulated, thought  patterns set up, and decisions dictated. And most of the millions so influenced are almost  oblivious to the powerful artificial agencies which were used to change their minds and their  morals.  There is no question whatsoever that Satan is pulling the strings and directing the subtle forces  which are designed to destroy us spiritually. Under the hypnotizing influence of these forces,  Christian minds have been just as successfully brainwashed as those of the most unregenerate  sinner.  Our only safety is to recognize the clever camouflages of the enemy. A thousand disguised  death traps have been planted all around us. Almost imperceptibly our thinking has been  affected by what we see and hear. Spiritual convictions have softened and disappeared  altogether. The fine sensitivity to sin has been blunted by incessant exposure to the apparent  innocent influences of our baited society.  In the Scriptures these assault weapons of Satan are referred to simply as "the world." And no  one can say that we have not been warned against their demoralizing effect. Paul, James, and  John all wrote with dramatic urgency about the dangers of collaborating with the world:  "Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love  of the Father is not in him. For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the  eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world." 1 John 2:15, 16.  "Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with  God? Whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world is the enemy of God." James 4:4.  "If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: but because ye are not of the world, but  I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you." John 15:19. "Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the  unclean thing;, and I will receive you." 2 Corinthians 6:17.  "Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a  peculiar people, zealous of good works." Titus 2:14.  These writers had an inspired obsession to expose the deadly error of mingling together the  
sacred and profane. They are saying to us with one voice, "Don't love the world. You are not of  the world. Come out of the world and be a peculiar and separated people."  These texts are not to be construed as orders to leave the physical occupation of the world.  Obviously, they are warnings against certain influences, customs, and ideas which would be  highly detrimental to the Christian way of life. Furthermore, Jesus Himself indicated that things  of the world would appear completely innocent in the eyes of men. He laid down an eternal  principle when He spoke these words to the Pharisees: "For that which is highly esteemed  among men is abomination in the sight of God." Luke 16:15.  Study that statement carefully. Christ is saying that the most honored, respected things in  society will be the greatest enemy of the truth. He is saying that His people would have to stand  on the opposite side from the prevailing practices of the world. True Christians will have to  reject the lifestyle which will be the accepted, approved norm for all the rest of the world. Do  we have any idea what is involved in taking such a position? It is not easy to stand against the  sincere, articulate opinions of popular national figures. And then there will be full support from  the great church systems to give even more credence to the things which are "highly esteemed  among men." This wrong way of life will be so patently taken for granted that any deviation will  be looked upon as stupid and irrational. E. G. White explains it thus: "When we reach the  standard that the Lord would have us reach, worldlings will regard Seventh-day Adventists as  odd, singular, strait-laced extremists.'' Fundamentals of Christian Education, p. 289.  This brings us to another most important question: What effect will all of these glamorised,  disguised approaches have upon the remnant church? The studied purpose of our great enemy  is to make sin appear unobjectionable, and if possible, to infiltrate the camp of the saints. The  one great citadel of strength, the last bulwark of defense which stands against the lawless one,  is the seed of the woman. According to Revelation 12:17, "The dragon was wroth with the  woman, and went to make war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments  of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ."  Satan hates the law of God. He hates the Sabbath. And he hates those who stand in the gap,  upholding the validity of that law. Down through the centuries the devil has devised special  weapons to use against the people of God. Those weapons have varied from generation to  generation. Often the sharp edge of persecution was turned against the little remnant who  stood loyal to the commandments of God. Persecution and the death sentence will come into the picture again as a desperate devil  unleashes the worst that he has against the true church. He knows this is the life or death  encounter which will settle the issues of the great controversy for all eternity. This time he will  overlook no advantage. Relying upon the psychological expertise of 6,000 years' experience of  trying to bend the human mind, he has initiated a softening-up operational plan against the  people he hates. That plan consists of gradually weakening the spiritual defenses of Seventh- day Adventists through worldly compromise. This will be the ultimate weapon which Satan has  cleverly designed to undermine the faith of every member of the remnant church.  How successful will it be? How many will be shaken out in the approaching crisis because they  yielded to the things of the world? We don't have to wonder. The answer has been given over  and over in the Spirit of Prophecy. It is a sickening answer, and we would like to believe it is not  true. But read it and marvel:  "I would say that we are living in a most solemn time. In the last vision given me, I was shown  
the startling fact that but a small portion of those who now profess the truth _ will be sanctified  by it and be saved. Many will get above the simplicity of the work. They will conform to the  world, cherish idols, and become spiritually dead." Testimonies, Vol. 1, pp. 608-609.  How incredible! The great majority of those who now rejoice in the truth will give up their faith  and be lost. They will be lost because they "conform to the world." Satan's insidious, innocent- appearing, highly esteemed lifestyle will disarm them, weaken them, and finally destroy them.  Another statement is even more specific: "The great proportion of those who now appear  genuine will prove to be base metal." Testimonies, Vol. 5, p. 136.  The softening-up strategy of the enemy is clearly described by E. G. White in these words: "The  time is not far distant when the test will come to every soul. The observance of the false  sabbath will be urged upon us. The contest will be between the commandments of God and the  commandments of men. Those who have yielded step by step to worldly demands, and  conformed to worldly customs, will then yield to the powers that be, rather than subject  themselves to derision, insult, threatened imprisonment, and death. At that time the gold will  be separated from the dross. True godliness will be clearly distinguished from the appearance  and tinsel of it. Many a star that we have admired for its brilliance will then go out in darkness.  Those who have assumed the ornaments of the sanctuary, but are not clothed with Christ's  righteousness, will then appear in the shame of their own nakedness." Prophets and Kings, p.  188.  Don't miss the line which describes the reason for this mass apostasy. "Those who have yielded  step by step to worldly demands, and conformed to worldly customs, will then yield to the  powers that be."  Not only will the majority be shaken out of the church they will actually turn against their  former brethren and become bitter enemies of the truth. "As the storm approaches, a large class who have professed faith in the third angel's message,  but have not been sanctified through obedience to the truth, abandon their position and join  the ranks of the opposition. By uniting with the world and partaking of its spirit, they have  come to view matters in nearly the same light; and when the test is brought, they are prepared  to choose the easy, popular side. Men of talent and pleasing address, who once rejoiced in the  truth, employ their powers to deceive and mislead the souls. They become the most bitter  enemies of their former brethren. When Sabbath keepers are brought before the courts to  answer for their faith, these apostates are the most efficient agents for Satan to misrepresent  and accuse them, and by false reports and insinuations to stir up the rulers against them." The  Great Controversy, p. 608.  Again we are fascinated by the expression, "By uniting with the world ... they are prepared to  choose the easy, popular side." Notice that it is a preparation work---"They are prepared ..."  Here again is revealed the fantastic psychological program of Satan to break down moral  barriers. Worldly compromise. Worldly conformity.  "The work which the church has failed to do in a time of peace and prosperity, she will have to  do in a terrible crisis, under most discouraging, forbidding circumstances. The warnings that  worldly conformity has silenced or withheld, must be given under the fiercest opposition from  enemies of the faith. And at that time the superficial, conservative class, whose influence has  steadily retarded the progress of the work, will renounce the faith, and take their stand with its  avowed enemies, toward whom their sympathies have long been tending. These apostates will  
then manifest the most bitter enmity, doing all in their power to oppress and malign their  former brethren and to excite indignation against them. This day is just before us." Testimonies,  Vol. 1, p. 278.  The words "worldly conformity" spring out at us again from this statement. Repeatedly we have  been warned about this massive attack of Satan through worldliness. Yet, we hear so very little  about this particular subject. Thousands of Seventh-day Adventists have been blinded to this  operational plan of the evil one. Some of our people have been led to believe that it is legalistic  to make any kind of issue over standards and lifestyles. To them it is "quibbling" and  judgmental. This is surely the way Satan would have them feel. They talk and think much about  the final test over the true Sabbath, but fail to see how the outcome of the test is being  determined right now.  Says Ellen White: "Those who are uniting with the world are receiving the worldly mould and  preparing for the Mark of the Beast. Those who are distrustful of self, who are humbling  themselves before God, and purifying their souls by obeying the truth-these are receiving the  heavenly mould and preparing for the Seal of God in their foreheads." Testimonies, Vol. 5, p.  216.  The mark of the beast will be enforced. Every soul will have to go to the side of the true  Sabbath or the counterfeit, Sunday. Seventh-day Adventists will face the death sentence for  their faith. And, tragically, the majority will not be able to stand in the crisis. They will prove disloyal because of earlier compromise and vacillation over Christian standards. By yielding  gradually to worldly custom and fashion their strength of will and decision will be so diluted  that they cannot endure the test. And this compromise is going on right now! This very moment  the great majority of our fellow church members are bending toward the world to such a  degree that they will be lost when the mark is enforced.  Here's the question that bothers me: Am I bending with them? How can I be sure that I'm not  following the drift which will bring on the great shaking in the church? What cleverly disguised,  diabolical method has Satan employed to blind the eyes of so many of God's people that they  will finally choose the world over the truth? It must surely be the polished masterpiece of all  the deceptive plans he has ever used against the saints. The people who have been noted for  their high standards will be tricked into yielding up their separated lifestyle. The average  Adventist today would indignantly deny that he is being worldly. The majority of our members  would express full assurance that they will not give up their faith, even in the face of death. Yet  we have just read that they will!  What does this mean? It means that most of our members are caught up in worldliness and  don't even realize it. They are indulging in dangerous compromise and think it is perfectly  innocent and acceptable. They have been so blinded that they cannot recognize the worldly  things they are doing.  Why can they not see their involvement with the world? Because the lowering of standards was  so gradual that none realized what was happening. The devil's scheme is not to make the  church suddenly abandon its historic position against the flesh and the world. He is far too  clever to think we will make any public announcement that it's all right to go to movies, wear  makeup and jewelry, or drink tea and coffee.  But Satan knows how the mind operates under the power of suggestion and association. With  infinite patience he introduces pictures, words, ideas, and practices that cannot be condemned  
per se. In fact, many of Satan's "innocent" devices are not only highly esteemed among men,  but have some commendable qualities and features. A perfect example of such a device is  television. And how many of us have heard convincing arguments for the fine news,  documentaries, and religious programming. No one can say that the TV console in the living  room is an evil thing in itself. Taken by itself it is a fine piece of furniture and a source of good  information.  Then begins the masterful process of psychological assault in which Satan is unexcelled. Very  slowly the discriminations are dulled by glimpses and snatches of borderline comedy, violence,  etc. The mind adjusts to the new level of input, and almost imperceptibly begins to tolerate the  changing quality of sight and sound.  Two inspired statements will help us see how the work of the enemy develops: "Satan will insinuate himself by little wedges, which widen as they make a place for themselves.  The specious devices of Satan will be brought into the special work of God at this time."  Selected Messages, Book 2, p. 21.  "The work of the enemy is not abrupt .... It is a secret undermining of the strongholds of  principle. It begins in apparently small things." Patriarchs and Prophets, p. 718.  How important it is to recognize the direction in which we are being led by any particular  influence. The manner in which quail are often trapped provides a parallel to Satan's tactics.  Wheat is placed several feet from the spot where a snare is triggered to spring shut on the  quail. At first the birds approach the good wheat with some obvious apprehension, but because  there is no danger in view their fears are allayed.  The next day the wheat is placed a bit nearer to the snare, and the birds are less wary of the  scattered grain. Day after day, the wheat is placed just a little bit closer to the trap, until the  quail are completely confident that there is nothing dangerous about the fine wheat. Then, of  course, the grain is placed inside the snare, and the birds still come. Innocently they trust the  good food to remain good, and a safe feast to remain safe. Then the trap is sprung.  I'm not contending that quails should stop eating wheat or that Christians should cease all good  activities. The point is that we should be cautious enough to consider the direction in which we  are being led and be willing to give up even the "good" things if they are taking us in a direction  of spiritual danger.  Can good things lead in the wrong direction? Indeed they can. Christians are led to give up their  high standards by degrees, often by a completely innocent-looking process.  This is the way compromise has always slipped into the church. Satan introduces an activity  which is only slightly objectionable. In fact, it might be very hard to define exactly why the  action isn't good. And because the deviation is so tiny no one really wants to make an issue  over it. Some faithful members of the church feel uncomfortable about the matter but are  reluctant to say anything for fear of being called fanatical. They decide to wait until there is a  larger issue before they take a strong stand.  Unfortunately, there will never be a larger issue. The devil makes certain that all the steps of  compromise are very small. He knows that hardly anyone would have the courage to make any  sustained objection to the minute degree of digression.  Once upon a time, the devil's favorite argument was, "Everybody else is doing it." Although the  young people still use that one occasionally, a new term is currently being tossed about to  justify worldly conformity: "A little bit is all right." The dress is just a little bit too short. The  
drink contains only a little bit of caffeine. The TV program shows only a little bit of violence. The  wedding ring is only a small one, and the cosmetics add just a little bit of color. We could go on  and on. We can't seem to learn the lesson of Lot as he left Sodom. Most of his family had refused to  leave the doomed city. He had lost everything he owned by choosing to live in that wicked  environment--his home, wealth, and lovely daughters. But when the angels urged him to flee  into the mountains, he begged for permission to move into another city! And his rationalization  was, "Is it not a little one?" Genesis 19:20.  How could he do that? Surely Lot had learned that the cities had almost destroyed him. Since  the day he "pitched his tent toward Sodom" the family had inched almost imperceptibly toward  involvement with the corrupt society of the inner city. Little by little the transition was made  from borderline neutrality to tongue-in-cheek participation.  When Lot pleaded to live in yet another city, he was demonstrating dramatically how gradual  compromise can blind the senses and distort the judgment.  How many in the modem church have long ago pitched their tent toward Sodom? How many  have taken that first, easily justified step toward compromise? And how many fellow Christians  felt uneasy about it but had not the courage to raise a warning? Later, what happened? Those  desensitized Christians began to defend the progressive drift of lowering standards by the same  argument, "Is it not a little one?" Does this not explain how worldliness has crept even into the  remnant church? For example: How did the miniskirt abomination become such a familiar sight  in Seventh-day Adventist churches on Sabbath morning? Sister White explains how it happened  with the hoop skirts in another generation, and you can see how Satan used the same subtlety  to introduce the miniskirt.  "The power of example is great. Sister A ventures to wear small hoops. Sister B says: It is not  worse for me to wear hoops than for Sister A, and she wears them a little larger. Sister C  imitates the example of Sister A and B, and wears her hoops a little larger than A and B, but all  contend that their hoops are small." Testimonies, Vol. 1, p. 278.  Does that sound familiar? Girls and ladies alike in the remnant church began to inch up in their  hemlines. If the knee length was all fight, then what was wrong with half an inch above the  knee? If it was modest at a half-inch above, then how could another haft-inch make it  immodest?  Why was so little said about it in protest? Because every stage of the leavening process was too  small to stir an alarm. Not even the ministry realized what was really taking place. Many dared  speak out, but they were quickly silenced by charges of having an evil mind. Very few continued  to blow the trumpet of warning against the growing violation of modesty.  How can we explain the blanket of silence that often attends these specious intrusions of the  world? Apparently much of it is rooted in the fear of offending.  "I saw that individuals would rise up against the plain testimonies. It does not suit their natural  feelings. They would choose to have smooth things spoken unto them, and have peace cried in their ears. I view the church in a more dangerous condition than they ever have been.  Experimental religion is known by but a few. The shaking must soon take place to purify the  church.  "Preachers should have no scruples to preach the truth as it is found in God's Word. Let the  truth out. I have been shown that why ministers have not been more successful, they are afraid  
of hurting feelings, fearful of not being courteous, and they lower the standard of troth and  conceal if possible the peculiarity of our faith. I saw that God could not make such successful.  The truth must be made pointed, and the necessity of a decision urged. And as false shepherds  are crying, Peace, and are preaching smooth things, the servants of God must cry aloud and  spare not, and leave the result with God." Spiritual Gifts, Vol. II, pp. 284-285.  "By some there is a shunning of the living testimony. Cutting truths must not be shunned. It  needs something besides theory to reach hearts now. It needs the stirring testimony to alarm  and arouse; that will stir the enemy's subjects, and then honest souls will be led to decide for  the truth. There has been and still is with some a disposition to have everything move on very  smoothly. They see no necessity of straight testimony.  "Sins exist in the church that God hates, but they are scarcely touched for fear of making  enemies. Opposition has risen in the church to plain testimony. Some will not bear it. They wish  smooth things spoken unto them. And if the wrongs of individuals are touched, they complain  of severity, and sympathize with those in the wrong .... When the church departs from God they  despise the plain testimony, and complain of severity and harshness. It is a sad evidence of the  lukewarm state of the church." Spiritual Gifts, Vol. II, pp. 283-284.  The great need is for courageous ministers who will speak boldly about right and wrong. The  pastor who truly loves his flock and his God will not hesitate to call sin by its right name in every  discourse. Straightforward preaching which creates concern over wrongdoing is the most  genuine demonstration of true love. Such men will weep much over their flock and with their  flock, but they will not withhold the message which can heal and restore.  Dietrich Bonhoeffer in his book Life Together made this significant statement: "Nothing can be  more cruel than the tenderness that consigns another to his sin. Nothing can be more  compassionate than the severe rebuke that calls a brother back from the path of sin." A  paragraph from the book Patriarchs and Prophets has influenced my own ministry more than  any other thing I have read outside of the Bible. Its solemn message has burned in my soul from  the first time I read it soon after ordination. It applies equally to parents as well as to pastors.  So, for me it has double impact.  "Those who have too little courage to reprove wrong, or who through indolence or lack of  interest make no earnest effort to purify the family or the church of God, are held accountable  for the evil that may result from the neglect of duty. We are just as responsible for evils that we  might have checked in others by exercise of parental or pastoral authority, as if the acts had  been our own." Patriarchs and Prophets, p. 578. Don't miss the thrust of that statement. If I am afraid to blow the trumpet and warn God's  people of approaching spiritual danger, and they are led into sin as a consequence, then I will  be held as accountable for those sins as if they were my own. I don't want to answer for the  sins of others. That's one reason I am writing this book. Too few are hearing about the covert  tactics of our great enemy to break down the strength of the church today.  The only way we are going to stop this worldly encroachment is to draw a line somewhere, and  stand on it. The nibbling away of our standards will continue until we muster the courage to  resist the first compromise. Mrs. White said, "The distance is widening between Christ and His  people, and lessening between them and the world." Spiritual Gifts, Vol. IV, p. 68. Again she  wrote: "Our only safety is to stand as God's peculiar people. We must not yield one inch to the  customs and fashions of this degenerate age, but stand in moral independence, making no  
compromise with its corrupt and idolatrous practices." Testimonies, Vol. 5, p. 78.  It will be our purpose in the following chapters to study certain large areas of Christian  standards which Satan has made the special focus of his plan of creeping compromise.  