POTLUCKS AND PRINCIPLES  

The Seventh-day Adventist church is not just another denomination. It is a movement raised up  in response to prophecy to Finish the Reformation. But what has happened to its program of  'reform' which once touched almost every phase of Christian living? The reform of diet has  been a trademark of the remnant church from its earliest beginnings, but that right arm has  been slowly deformed through being gradually conformed to fleshly appetite. In too many cases the great governing principles, based upon co-operation with natural law,  have been slowly watered down and washed away. Adventist potlucks have become almost  synonymous with over-indulgence. Except for the absence of meat on the groaning boards, the  after-sermon fellowships have featured the same unhealthy mountain of sweets and spices  which lure the world into gluttony.  The control of appetite is the basic victory which must be gained, through the power of Christ,  to redeem the tragic indulgence of our first parents. Our Lord faced the issue squarely in the  
wilderness. Through prayer and reliance upon the Word, He overcame the tempter on the  same point in which the first Adam miserably failed. This is the victory which every child of  Adam must claim in order to be saved.  How has the original concept of health reform become so distorted that non-Adventists can  only remember that we don't eat meat? What happened to the principles of exercise, right  combinations, unrefined foods, little sugar and salt, no eating between meals, whole grains, no  drugs, plenty of water, and not eating too much? Hundreds of thousands believe and keep the  Sabbath, but are actually digging their graves with their teeth.  Almost imperceptibly a change has taken place among our people over the care of the body.  No, we have not forgotten the texts about the temple of God. We still pride ourselves on  refraining from pork and sea foods, and probably 50 percent of Seventh-day Adventists have  given up flesh foods entirely. But this is not the health reform message in its entirety. Nowhere  has Satan's argument about little things been more effective. By rationalizing over small  transgressions, the appetite has strengthened its hold over the bodies of Seventh-day  Adventists. Obesity is just about as prevalent among us as it is in the world.  It would be interesting to conduct a survey that would give a tree reading concerning self- denial. How many members of our church really say "No" to their appetites? Would it be found  that most of them eat just about the way their appetite dictates, without restraint or  restriction? Perhaps you should stop reading this for a moment and answer the questions for  yourself. Do you deliberately curb and restrict your desire to eat more than you need? Are you  able to pass by the dessert tables with their dangerous assortment of sugary pastries? How  often do you yield to the temptation to nibble between meals?  Too many have minimized these matters as being unimportant, but they are a considerable part  of the great body of inspired counsel which God has committed to this church. Many books,  with hundreds of pages, have dramatized the urgency of obeying the laws of our body just as  carefully as the laws of God. Deliberate violation of those basic laws of our health could unfit us  for the kingdom of God. Is that too strong a statement? Let's look at it a bit closer.  Why do we consider it a sin to use tobacco and alcohol? Because it is harmful to the body, and  can shorten the life. The Bible says God will destroy those who defile their bodies (1 Corinthians  3:16, 17). Question: Can you shorten your life by not getting enough exercise? Indeed, it has  been demonstrated by scientific data that thousands have died prematurely of heart attacks that could have been prevented. Cigarette smoking is not the only cause of heart attack and  untimely death. Does this mean that refusing to get sufficient exercise might be just as wrong  as using tobacco? Undoubtedly it does. Until Seventh-day Adventists stop rationalizing away  these clearly revealed principles, we cannot hope to escape the crippling effects of our  transgression.  It must be understood that we are dealing with spiritual matters when we talk about extending  the gift of life. We tend to smile away such inspired counsel as "Never should a morsel of food  pass the lips between meals" (Counsels on Health, p. 118), but this is a vital principle of good  health. Unless we draw lines to protect the delicate organs of digestion, we shall also continue  to experience the same ill health and disorders which plague the rest of the fallen race.  Sporadic spurts of obedience are not enough. The power of decision must be called upon. Stern  battles with self will undoubtedly take place, but habitual conformity to the divine blueprint will  bring its own reward.  
In the light of so much counsel on the subject, how can we explain why almost half of our  people still feed on the dead bodies of animals? Mrs. White wrote in Counsels on Diet and  Foods: "Not an ounce of flesh meat should enter our stomachs." Page 380.  "Those who use flesh meat disregard all the warnings that God has given us concerning this  question. They have no evidence they are walking in safe paths." Ibid., p. 383.  "Among those who are waiting for the coming of the Lord, meat eating will eventually be done  away; flesh will cease to form a part of their diet." Ibid., pp. 380-381.  With the mushrooming growth of pollution and chemical poisoning, we hardly should need  such pages of specific instruction to turn us from a meat diet. Some of the most popular meats  have been tested and rejected by failing to meet minimum health standards. Consumer Reports  magazine made an extensive research on hamburgers and gave the results in August, 1971. "A  shocking large percentage of the hamburger we purchased was well on the way to  putrefaction."  Ralph Nader, whose organization did a prolonged investigation of packing houses, summed up  their findings on hamburgers and hot dogs in the Florida magazine November 7, 1971:  "All these processed meats constitute an imaginative food innovation; they are often used as a  handy and profitable dump that allows the packers to get rid of their scraps, substandard or  diseased meat, and their less desirable cuts. All they do is douse all these inferior leftovers with  coloring and seasoning agents, and market them to an unsuspecting public. Court evidence has  shown that contaminated meat, horse meat, and meat from diseased animals that was  originally slated for dog or cat food has often wound up as hamburger or sausage; while lungs,  eyeballs, pig blood and chopped hides are mixed into hot dogs and luncheon meats. "To reduce the stench and foul taste, such meat is frequently impregnated with sulphite, an  illegal additive that gives old and decaying meat a healthy pink blush. Since the meat used is  often filthy, detergents are frequently used to wash off the dirt and, to stretch profits, so-called  binders are added to hold the shreds of meat together--generally cereals, but occasionally  sawdust."  Perhaps a word should be said about the Adventist consumption of sugar. Recent medical  discoveries have confirmed the Spirit of Prophecy statements as to the detrimental effects of  sugar on the human body. But do we, as a people, eat less than the national average of 102  pounds per year? From the scenes around the Sabbath potluck table, it would seem that we  don't. The average daily consumption is 32 teaspoons. One piece of apple pie has eight  teaspoons and a bottle of root beer ten teaspoons. That's over half the daily average. One  banana split contains 25 teaspoons of sugar, believe it or not. No, we probably are clogging our  bodies just as effectively, and a lot more deliberately, than most non-Seventh-day Adventists.  Excess sugar in sweets of various kinds is commonly associated with obesity, diabetes,  hypoglycemia, coronary heart disease and arthritis.  It would seem quite unnecessary to admonish Adventists about the wrong in using caffeinated  beverages, but we are living in that age of creeping compromise. Strange as it may seem, this  first cousin to nicotine has slowly wormed its way into many Seventh-day Adventist pantries.  The old Lot philosophy, "Is it not a little one?" has justified the use of a little more and a little  more. Beginning with the 3 percent variety, the taste and the addiction for caffeine has been  indulged until the habit is fixed.  What is God's counsel about it? "Tea and coffee drinking is a sin, an injurious indulgence, which,  
like other evils, injures the soul." Counsels on Diet and Foods, p. 425. From this statement one  might deduce that decaffeinated coffee is only 3 percent sin, but it may be more than that. The  fact is that if all caffeine could be removed, the drink would still be highly detrimental. Quite  apart from the caffeine, coffee contains caffeol, a volatile oil which gives the unique taste and  aroma. It is the caffeol which does more damage to the stomach than the caffeine. In an  interview published in U.S. News & World Report, Dr. Joseph F. Montague, a leading authority  on intestinal disorders, made this statement about cafeol "If you take a cup of coffee before  you add milk or sugar and let it stand a minute, you will see oil float to the surface and swirl  around. These oils are very irritating to the stomach and duodenum, and to my mind are  productive of more irritation, more pre-ulcerous conditions than anything else people eat.  When a person takes this coffee in the morning, he is pepped up. But in reality he simply  tightens the screw that holds the string of nervous tension." U.S. News & World Report,  February 26, 1968.  The cola drinks are required by law to contain some caffeine but not more than about 50  milligrams per ten-ounce bottle. Coca-Cola derives its flavor from the coca leaf, while other cola  drinks are made from the kola nut. Please note that coca leaf is the sole source of cocaine, one  of the most potent drugs, whose medicinal use is severely limited and supervised. The company claims that all the cocaine has been removed, but repeated efforts to learn the effectiveness of  such a process have been in vain.  Many people do not understand that Dr. Pepper is also a caffeinated beverage, containing  slightly more caffeine than the Coca-Cola. Not only have Food and Drug Administration sources  confirmed this, but the Dr. Pepper syrup dispensed at the fountains is clearly labeled as  containing caffeine. Large numbers of Seventh-day Adventists, some knowingly and others  ignorantly, continue to consume the addictive Dr. Pepper, which is possibly more harmful than  the worst cola drink.  Surely the time has come to throw off this cloak of compromise and follow consistently the  grand pattern of truth that has been committed to this church. Revival and the latter rain are  awaiting those who will stand firmly on the side of undivided obedience--an obedience rooted  in a deep, spiritual, personal commitment to Jesus Christ.  DESTROYING YOUR WITNESS  Suppose some giant computer could make a faithful record of all our thoughts as well as our  words. Would we be pleased to see the results spread out before us? It would probably be a  shocking experience to see the concrete evidence of what we consider the most important  matters in life. What do we think about the most? What subject is so important to us, so dear  to our hearts, that we talk about it more than any other topic? Most of us, as Christians, would  like to believe that the computer printout would reveal thoughts and words about Jesus and His  glorious troth, above all other subjects.  Surely our spiritual commitment should take priority over every earthly competitor for our time  and attention, including family and job. The personal relations with Jesus Christ must be given  absolute and unchallenged recognition as the supreme issue in the life of every Christian. Jesus  taught that we should love Him more than father or mother, husband or wife, son or daughter.  He said also, "Whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not all that he hath, he cannot be my  disciple." Luke 14:33. Talk about priorities! Anything that gets in the way of serving Christ  should be immediately put out of the way. Anyone who begins to compete with God for the  
highest place in our affections should be instantly denied that position.  Obviously then, the focus of every Christian should be upon spiritual things. Every aspect of his  life should revolve around the one great centre of serving God and sharing Him with others.  This does not mean that most of our time will be spent in church. It does not imply either that  we stay on our knees through much of the day. The fact is that family, profession, and friends  will occupy most of the waking hours of every week. But the centrality of Christ in the life does  mean that all the related activities of earning a livelihood, relaxing with the family, and  associating with friends will be permeated with the sweet Spirit of an ever-present Savior  abiding in the heart. Not many Christians are able to give sermons or Bible studies, but all can preach powerful  sermons by living out the beautiful principles of Bible truth. Regardless of talents, education, or  profession, every Seventh-day Adventist should be a soul winning witness of the obedient life.  We do not have an ordinary message. Our doctrines are thrilling, life-changing principles taken  directly from the Bible. We can cite the example of Jesus and the apostles for every one of the  standards held by this church. We are the "remnant," or last end piece, of the New Testament  Church. This is why we keep the Sabbath just like they did. We eat and drink to the glory of God  by abstaining from harmful foods. So did the apostles.  Being filled with love and desiring to run no risk of displeasing the Savior, we obey the  injunctions of the Scriptures against worldly adornment and vain attire. The foot-washing  service is peculiar to our worship, but it was given by the example of Jesus Himself. Our  distinctive lifestyle touches every phase of daily conduct. It is all bound up with our religion and  our spiritual commitment.  Christ is coming very soon. These final probationary moments are for preparing to meet Him.  Others may not believe this, but we know it is true. There is no time to waste on the inanities of  TV, dancing, theatre, and worldly pleasures. By the power of consistent holy living we must  draw others away from the emptiness of materialism. Satan is almost having his way all around  this polluted planet. Even popular religion has been infiltrated and manipulated by him.  One stubborn pocket of resistance stands against the evil one, and that is the remnant church.  No heavier responsibility ever rested upon any people than upon those who represent the final  warning message of truth in this generation. We are a savour of life or death to multitudes who  linger in the valley of decision. Every soul will be drawn to join us in obeying this message, or  else will receive the mark of the beast by rejecting it.  Everything we do will influence the people we meet to make a decision--a decision for or  against the truth. What do our words, actions, dress, and diet say to those whose only sermon  will be what they see in us? Many of them will be under conviction, but they will also be looking  for a loophole around the unpopular demands of truth.  Whether we like the idea or not, our lives will be under the searchlight of scrutiny. Half- convinced to go ahead in faith to obey the Word of God, many will look to us for  encouragement. Some will be wrestling over the Sabbath question. Their family business  establishment will have to close on the Sabbath if they decide to be baptized. They need to  know that it is all-important to honor the Lord of the Sabbath by keeping His day holy. What  will they see in us? Would your Sabbath-keeping right now show them the joy of putting Christ  first? Or would they see you eating out in a restaurant for Sabbath dinner, causing them to  question as to whether it really is all that important to close their own commercial enterprise  
on the Sabbath? If they are given the idea that the Sabbath is only a holiday and not a holy day,  they will make a quick decision to stay right where they are. If Sabbath-keeping is just like  Sunday-keeping, then maybe they can justify keeping their employees on the job that day. Some judgment-bound souls will be struggling over the problem of giving up unclean foods.  Convicted and convinced about the body temple, they look around in the church for strength to  make the difficult break. What do they see? I'll tell you what one person saw. I know, because it  happened just two weeks ago from this writing, in one of my crusades. A young mother had  made her decision for baptism. A few days before the baptism she was invited to the home of a  Seventh-day Adventist lady. While there she was offered a cup of coffee. Only a week earlier  she had, with severe trauma, made file break with a lifetime habit of drinking coffee. Although  she explained this to her new Adventist friend, she was still urged to go ahead and take the  coffee. She held her ground, but the next day she faced me with some questions that I had a  hard time answering. Unfortunately, that lady did not follow through with baptism, and has not  at this writing. Coffee drinking does not appear as a small thing when it causes a soul to make a  decision against obeying the truth. Christian standards are tied to the Christian witness, and  thousands are destroying their witness by the distorted notion that little things don't matter.  Every lady who enters the remnant church passes through the throes of decision over makeup  and jewelry. It is not easy to change the customs of time and tradition, especially when they are  rooted in feminine vanity. Fashion is a slave-master. Sometimes husbands are opposed to  everything the new religion is doing to their wives, and when they remove the wedding ring  with the other ornaments, it precipitates a real crisis in the family. Convicted by the Word of  God these ladies decide to put God first, and to accept the challenge of Peter to win their  unbelieving husbands by removing their ornaments (1 Peter 3:1-3). Then they look around the  church for support and approval. What do they see? Not only a sprinkling of wedding rings, but  flashing brooches, pins, and costume jewelry. Are they encouraged? Yes, they are encouraged  to go ahead and wear the wedding ring; and if symbolic rings are acceptable, then the class  rings, birthstone rings, engagement rings, and friendship rings are all right too. And perhaps  even the sentimental earrings that Grandma passed along as a remembrance.  Are we talking about practical things? Does it really happen? Indeed it does, and many are  turned away from the truth because the members are not living what they preach. Some ladies  are devotees of style, and find it hard to give up the vanities of the world. They see just enough  dyed hair, wigs, and artificial adornment in the church to comfort them in their own worldly  pride. Their questions about wearing slacks and pants are also settled quickly as they see them  walking into the sanctuary on Sabbath morning and Wednesday night.  The problem is that no one can ever win the victory over an enemy that they secretly admire.  Many sisters in the church have a secret love of the world, and have, therefore, never been able  to win the battle against sinful pride and worldliness. Until they learn to love Jesus supremely  and are willing to deny self, they will continue to be stumbling blocks to others.  What will it take to arouse and revive the church on these crucial issues of Christian living? How  can we get the church members excited about the truth, so that it fills their lives? When  evangelistic meetings are held every member should be there, eager and enthusiastic about the  opportunity to share the truth. Tragically, only a faithful few of the members support the  
meetings night by night as the message is presented. I've seen fine men make their decision in the crusade and join the church. Later they are invited to the homes of deacons and elders who  gave only token support to the evangelistic meetings. But in those homes the new member is  invited to spend an afternoon looking at a ball game on TV. There the church leader finally gets  excited, but alas, it is over the fanatical excesses of one team trying to beat down and humiliate  another team. With shouts and uncontrolled excitement he sits for hours, completely absorbed  in an activity that is the very antithesis of everything Jesus stood for and taught. That deacon  knows all the batting averages and league records, but he'll sit next Sabbath half asleep in  church and will not know a single answer in the Sabbath School class. He will probably give his  ingathering goal and will do lip service to the lay activity plans for literature distribution, but his  life interest is not God's work. Like Mrs. Lot he is bound to the things of the world, and all his  stereotyped, platform-religious functions will not change the sentence of death against him.  Until that man becomes more vocal about soul winning than he is about a ball game there can  be no hope for his salvation. This is why the great majority in the church today will be shaken  out. Little by little, they have allowed the world to nibble away their experience, followed by  the loss of Christian standards. Finally, only a dead form remains---a form that will crumble  quickly under the stresses of the time of trouble.  After the ball game is over it is not hard to imagine that our new male member might question  his Adventist host about the correct procedure for tithing. Being a businessman he has a little  misunderstanding about gross income and net pay. Also, what about the offerings beyond the  tithe? Can people really afford to give more than ten percent of their income? It has been a  tremendous step of faith for this man to make his decision for baptism because of a financial  crisis in his business which made it seem insane to start tithing. Now he feels the need of  reassurance from a leader in the church who will be able to confirm the promises of the Bible.  It may well be that the deacon will bear a thrilling testimony of God' s miracle grace in behalf of  those who are faithful stewards. Being an officer in the church he would be one of the 51  percent who are faithful tithers. Incredibly, there is a 49 percent segment of our world  membership who are not tithing at all. Perhaps some have no income, but many are literally  stealing from God every week by misappropriating His holy tithe. With this fact before us it is  easier to understand how that greater proportion of God's people will be shaken out in the  testing time.  Perhaps more Adventists will be lost over the issue of money than any other factor. This may  explain why Jesus had so much to say about stewardship. In these days of materialistic plenty it  would seem logical for Satan to concentrate on this device. There is an innate selfishness within  the carnal heart of man which Satan is successfully exploiting today.  Is it not a reasonable and extremely advantageous arrangement for a tenant to cultivate a farm,  keeping 90 percent of the harvest, and yielding up 10 percent to the owner of the property?  Everything that passes through our hands belongs to God and He is merely allowing us to use it.  How good and gracious He is to ask only a tithe which is assigned back by Him to use in  preaching the Gospel. Do the promises of faithful giving mean what they say? Will God rebuke the devourer? And  what about giving beyond the tenth? Jesus said, "Give, and it shall be given unto you; good  measure, pressed down, and shaken together, and running over." Luke 6:38. In other words, we  cannot out give the Lord. No matter how drastically we stretch our faith and try to give a  
sacrificial amount, it always comes back to us in some way. The promises of God cannot fail.  Most people suffer from pocketbook protectionitis. Whether they have little or much there is a  propensity to grasp it tightly and try to get more and more and more. Jesus indicated that few  rich men would make it into heaven. This is not because it is a sin to have money or property.  Some wealthy people are dedicated Christians and they will be saved. There are really only two  kinds of rich people--those who have made themselves rich and those whom God has made  rich. By giving liberally some have claimed the overflowing blessings of the Bible promises. They  keep pouring it out and God keeps pouring it back in greater measure.  Some may object and say, "That doesn't make sense. There is only a certain amount of money  to deal with, and it can only go so far." The ones who raise such objections are sincerely  perplexed because they have not experimented with the promises, and it does seem  presumptuous and unreasonable. We can just as well explain how the loaves and fishes fed a  multitude as we can comprehend how we get more by giving more. But those who have  stepped out in faith to do it know that it happens. They don't try to explain it. It will not work  out on paper, but the more they give to the Lord the better off they become financially.  I'll never forget being challenged by a friend years ago to put God to the test. He was giving 25  percent of his income to God and had prospered tremendously. My wife and I decided to take  God at His word. We stepped out into an apparent giving plan of great sacrifice, but we have  yet to catch up with the sacrifice. Gradually, our giving increased from 25 percent to 30 percent  to 35 percent and almost to 40 percent one year, yet we have increased in material blessings as  our faith increased. How thankful we have been that someone urged us to test the promises of  God. Now we feel so sorry for those who have missed the thrill of seeing God do the impossible  by multiplying the loaves.  In a thousand cities, towns, and villages around the world the work of God languishes for lack of  funds. This should be the smallest problem facing the remnant church today, because God has  given the means to His people for finishing the work. What an account we must settle some day  if we hold that money and property until it is worthless. Now it can be used to prepare souls for  the Kingdom. ;Jesus urged His people to lay up treasure in heaven by using the money, not  storing it away to rust and mildew. Millions of dollars have been willed to godless children by  Adventist parents who should have known that it would be used to advance the devil's cause  instead of the truth. That money could have hastened the coming of Jesus and the restoration  of all things.  Jesus spoke of the "deceitfulness of fiches," in Matthew 13:22. Will that deceit involve Seventh- day Adventists who plan some day to place their property upon the altar for God? Many right  now are watching the last opportunity pass by in which their accumulated wealth could be utilized for the cause. In the face of a miserable giving record they live in luxurious ease. How  true Christ's words, "For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also." Matthew 6:21.  When the money has been invested in God's work, the giver's heart is bound up with the work  as well. These are the exceptional ones who will not be deceived by riches, but will have  treasure in heaven. 