TELEVISION TRAP  

Reference has already been made to the insidious intrusion of the innocent-looking television  cabinet into the home. Because there are occasional programs which meet the Bible test of  truth, purity, etc., it is easy to succumb to the argument that the set will be used as an  educational tool for the family. Solemn resolutions are usually made concerning the high  quality of program that will be approved for viewing. But let's be honest and truthful. For how  long do those restrictive regulations continue to govern the television set? Policing becomes  almost impossible because of the borderline nature of many programs. Uncertainty over where  to draw a line, whether a few words of profanity disqualify an hour-long documentary, and other equally perplexing decisions soon become too tedious to tolerate. The door is opened  wider and wider, and the discriminative senses accommodate to the increasing flow of below- standard pictures and scenes. It is easy to justify a little more loose language because of the  scattered use of expletives by popular network news reporters. Many of the advertising  commercials are also laced with innuendoes which belittle the Christian moral standards.  It is becoming more difficult to believe that even the most careful selective viewing will not also  produce a spiritual de-sensitivity. Snatches and phrases of gutter talk creep into some of the  most highly-touted educational shows. Many argue that we must learn to live with this kind of  language because it surrounds us all the time. It is true that we often overhear the vulgarities of  the world around us, but should we deliberately expose ourselves to that which we could  avoid?  The truth is that most of us face severe struggles in turning away from the enticing scenes of  evil that we cannot avoid while walking down the street. There is enough temptation to occupy  all of our time and effort without bringing a deliberate source of temptation right into the living  room.  What many fail to understand is that there can be sin in a look. If someone had come up behind  Mother Eve in the Garden and asked her what she was doing in front of the forbidden tree, she  probably would have answered, "I'm just looking." But those looks of Eve led into all the  multiplied sorrows and eventual deaths of billions of human beings over six tragic millenniums.  King David awoke from an afternoon nap and, quite by chance, saw his neighbor's beautiful  wife taking a bath on her Mediterranean roof-garden. It is more than likely, if someone had  asked David what he was doing, he would have answered, "Just looking." But those looks led to  adultery and murder, sins which influenced a nation to forget God. The results of his immorality  with Bathsheba so marked the family of David that four of his own children were taken from  him by tragedy or apostasy. How bitterly he later lamented the scarring consequences of his  innocent "looking."  The indelible influence of mental patterns cannot be over emphasized. By beholding we  become changed. Thoughts are produced by what a person sees. "For as he thinketh in his  heart, so is he." Proverbs 23:7. This brings us to one of the most awesome reasons that  
television can be detrimental to the Christian life. It is based upon the principle of vicarious or  mental participation in sin. Jesus declared: "Ye have heard that it was said of them of old time,  Thou shalt not commit adultery: But I say unto you, That whosoever looketh on a woman to  lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart." Matthew 5:27, 28.  Please take note that the mind is capable of creating such realistic mental pictures that people  actually become involved in the imaginary scenes. The participation is so real that Jesus said we  are held accountable for what we permit our minds to dwell upon, just as though we were  going through the physical a6t itself. Since the brain is the decision centre for the body, every  act performed must first be conceived in the mind before it can be translated into action. The brain, through the vast nerve communication system, sends the message for hands, feet or  other physical organs to go into action. This, by the way, is the precise point of the strongest  temptation. Harboring the mental picture until it transmits the order for the body to act is so  presumptuous and so debilitating to the will that few people are able to mm back from obeying  the order.  The Christian's only sure protection from sin is to reject the thought or imagination of evil  which Satan seeks to impose on the mind. Once the evil deed has been harbored and  pondered, even though only as a thought, the incredible intimate relationship of mind and body  begins to produce physical reactions. With the speed of electricity the brain sends out the  message alerting the entire body to the contemplated action. Now the mind and body unite in  bringing pressure for the person to perform the act.  But let us suppose that it is impossible for the person to carry out the physical indulgence  prompted by the mind. Perhaps a lustful attitude has been produced in the thoughts, but there  is no one with whom to participate in the act of sin. Or if the person is a Christian, he might  have such strong inhibitions against the contemplated act that he will resist carrying out the  impulses of the mind. In this case the sin exists only in the imagination. But such is the power of  thought that, in God's sight, the vicarious mental performance of the sin is counted as serious  as the physical indulgence itself.  Now let us apply this principle to the watching of TV. Nowhere do we see a more vivid  demonstration of vicarious participation. Even though the viewer may be mature enough to  know that the scene is only a fabricated, pretend-situation, yet he becomes as emotionally  involved in the picture as if he were actually living out the experience. The heart pounds with  fright, the eyes fill with tears, and the viewer is mentally projecting himself into the scene.  Whether fighting and shooting his way out of a desperate situation, suffering the trauma of  incurable disease, or yielding to the excitement of a provocative bedroom scene, the viewer is  caught up in the plot, taking part by proxy in the adventures of the hero or heroine. Jesus said  that this kind of participation is just as wrong as the actual physical involvement.  Try to imagine the fantastic strategy of Satan in his use of the television media. It staggers the  mind even to think about it. Here is a situation in which the devil inspires one act of simulated  sin; for example, an artificial, make-believe portrayal of adultery. But through his manipulation  of the emotions, Satan can mm that one acted-out sin into a million real sins of adultery,  because a million people will project themselves into the picture. And in their minds it is not  make-believe. It is so real that even their bodies react. The emotions of lust and fear so fully  obsess the beholder that even though they can't take part physically in the sin, their minds and  wills are affected in exactly the same way as if they were taking part. And more serious still,  
God holds them just as guilty as if they had done it personally.  What a clever, diabolical way to turn people into thieves, murderers, and adulterers! Satan only  has to work with the scriptwriters and actors to produce the most al>pealing, realistic and  emotional plots. From that point the natural laws of the mind take over, and the viewers become emotional captives of whatever they allow themselves to look at. One day they may be  living out the experience of shoplifting, the next day of murder, and later of fornication or  adultery. To the actors on the screen it is preposterous pretence, but to the viewers*it is,  momentarily at least, an opportunity to do all the exciting things that God and society forbid,  without having to face the consequences of doing them. But do we have to face the  consequences? Not physically perhaps, but the moral responsibility for those vicarious deeds  every person will have to face in the judgment. For those who have not confessed and forsaken  those sins, what a terrible account must be rendered for the prostitution of the sacred powers  of mind and will.  Surely this principle of sin by substitution explains why the Bible speaks so strongly on the  subject of the five senses. Jesus made it clear that no effort should be spared in safeguarding  the avenues of the mind. Immediately after His comment about looking on a woman in lust, He  said, "And if thy fight eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee: for it is profitable for  thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into  hell." Matthew 5:29.  This text has been often misconstrued. Jesus was not talking about the physical eye. A person  could lose one eye and still be evil and perverse. He was talking about the things on which the  eye focuses. If the eye is looking at something which is liable to lead the mind to harbor sin,  Jesus was saying that the most drastic action should be taken to put those scenes out of view.  In other words, "Don't continue to look at something which is spiritually offensive and  provocative." Doing so could lead into sin and cause the person to be "cast into hell."  What a dramatic example of the dangers of "just looking" at wrong pictures. Translated into a  modern setting Christ was saying that if we have a television set in the home which we cannot  control, it is better to cast it out of the house onto the junk pile than to be led into sin by its  influence. Better to lead a so-called one-eyed existence without television than to lose our soul  by defiling, sinful thoughts created by television.  The command of Christ was to "pluck it out," to turn away from what the eye is looking at. The  choice is ours to make. The only way to be pure-minded is to look at, listen to, and speak only  the things that are pure. Paul said, "Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever  things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever, things  are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any  praise, think on these things." Philippians 4:8. The secret of being pure, honest, and virtuous is  to think that way, and the way we think is determined by what we see, hear and speak. David  said, "I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes." Psalm 101:3.  To these spiritual factors we could add pages of shocking statistics on the effect of TV violence  upon the mind and morals, upon crime incitation, and scholastic achievement. These are well  known and off-repeated. No one will ever know exactly how many blueprints for crime have  been carefully detailed in a TV story, and later put into operation by an assortment of muggers,  thieves, and rapists. Society today is in the grip of a growing complacency toward violence and human suffering.  
Constant television exposure to cruelty and inhumanity has created a climate of amazing  indifference to our fellow man. People do not want to get involved. Usually they pass  heedlessly by the victim of attack. Public reaction to natural calamities such as earthquakes,  floods, or famine is almost ho-hum. The 6:00 p.m. newscast pictures of thousands dying in  South America or Turkey make even less impression than last night's late-movie scenes. The  animated, bizarre portrayals which have been commercially prepared to impress have far  greater response than the actual stories of suffering and death. The fine sensibilities of  compassion have been blunted and almost destroyed by the continuous bombardment of the  emotions by Hollywood "thrill and horror" specialists.  The impact of death is diminished by the constant overexposure. Even newscast-picture reports  of assassination and murder are viewed repeatedly on successive programs. It is almost as  though the murdered person springs to life only to be killed and resurrected over and over  again. The prolonged screening of Lee Harvey Oswald's murder is an example of such  televiolence. The mind finally almost rejects the reality of what is being viewed.  What effect does it finally have upon human conscience and character? No doubt, there is an  innate morbid desire to witness violence without guilt. As an innocent bystander the TV  watcher is neither the aggressor nor the victim. With nothing to do but watch, and being unable  to intervene, he gradually adjusts to a mentality of fascinated inaction. Under constant  bombardment, the mind actually blurs to what is fantasy and what is reality. This is why so  many are able to stand by and watch brutality and violence in real life without lifting a finger.  A bride recently said, "We are starting out with just the bare necessities of life; a bed, a stove,  and a TV set." With 98 percent of American homes owning a set, try your best to visualize the  effect of its 6 1/2 hours of operation.  Children spend one third of their waking hours under the artificial, hammering influence of  ideas and philosophies which their parents do not originate and often do not even know about.  It has been determined that one quarter of the children between 5 and 20 watch over five  hours of television every school day. This is even more time than they are under the direct  instruction of schoolteachers; more time than they play each day, or eat. Only sleeping time  tops television as the greatest time consumer.  What type of message is being literally driven into the open minds of these boys and girls? Of  all TV programming, 83 percent contains violence, and 98 percent of cartoons depict violent  action. In fact, when your children are watching cartoons, they are treated to an average 30  acts of violence every two minutes. Western and detective dramas are not much better,  because 97 percent of them contain violence.  But what about the children who are not old enough to be in school? There are nearly twelve  million of them between three and five years of age. According to the Nielsen Television Index,  these preschoolers sit in front of the tube an average of 54.1 hours each week. Think of the power exerted over the pliable minds and emotions of these near-babies. For 64 percent of  their waking hours they absorb the tensions, violence, and nerve-warping inanities of  commercial television. Do we wonder why older generations of youth seem to be having  difficulty adjusting to real life and people? Dr. Victor B. Cline of the University of Utah has  estimated that between kindergarten and age 14 a child witnesses the violent death of over  13,000 human beings on the TV screen. Since the pre-kindergarteners are watching 64 percent  of their days, try to imagine how many murders they witness beyond those 13,000. No hard- 
bitten veteran of daily combat ever came near the horrible mayhem and slaughter of the daily  TV fare.  Perhaps the most conclusive study on the subject of TV aggression was documented by Alfred  Bandura and Associates, and was published in the Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology.  Their conclusions were drawn from actual observation of normal children, measured by  reactions of a control group, when exposed to screen violence. Their emphatic conclusion was  that filmed aggression heightened aggressive dispositions in children. They definitely do imitate  the violent behavior which they view on TV programs.  In 1969 the National Commission on the Causes and Prevention of Violence gave a report on  their exhaustive research. Here is the substance of their conclusions: "The preponderance of  available research evidence strongly suggests ... that violence in television programs can and  does have adverse effects upon audiences--particularly child audiences."  One of the saddest obvious results of child TV addiction is the tragic breakdown in  communication with parents. For those five crucial hours each day there is absolutely no  interaction with anyone. Dr. D. M. Azimi, Chairman of the Department of Sociology and  Anthropology at the University of Pennsylvania in Indiana, Pennsylvania, believes that children  can "hallucinate" on shows filled with violence, sex and aggression. "Interrupt someone  watching TV and notice the deep trance he is in. He'll get annoyed with you for breaking into his  drug-like reverie, but if you ask what was just said on the program, he won't be able to tell you.  "Parents become TV 'pushers' to their children. Most kids, at a very early age, would like to  have a warm, close relationship with their parents. But the parents tell them, 'Go watch TV. I'm  busy.'  "Soon the habit takes hold of them and they begin to sit glassy-eyed, in a stupor, 'hooked' by  TV. And once they get the habit, it's as hard to take away from them as drugs would be."  If parents do not protect their own children from the incessant emotional assault of television,  who will do it? The industry is not concerned about anybody's children. They are intent on one  thing--consumption. It takes no expert to see that their primary appeal is to human vanity, lust,  and greed. Market psychologists gear their commercials to the wide-eyed innocents who have  no defense. Spectacular, hypocritical claims are soon disproved, however, and the phoniness is  revealed. The unfortunate after-effect is a corrosive attitude of cynicism and distrust on the  part of the young. Have you noticed what stereotypes are portrayed on the average TV program? Teachers are  generally portrayed as incompetent, vindictive misfits. Happiness comes through as being  young and sexy. Marriage is represented as a dull drag, or something to be flaunted by exciting  infidelity. Parents are often projected as bumbling, outdated squares with no authority or  ability to make sound decisions. The very basics of home and society are subtly undermined by  the great majority of TV shows, including some of the most popular ones. It should be no great  wonder that our greatest social problem today is how to keep the family from disappearing as  the basic unit of society.  